hi I'm RJ Laverne from the Davey tree
expert company welcome to this edition
of talking trees today we're going to
explore another edition of fact or
fiction
so today's fact or fiction statement is
do healthy landscape trees indoor
summertime storms better than unhealthy
trees well that one's pretty easy that
certainly is a fact but let's explore
some of the questions as to how we can
help keep our landscape trees healthy
there's clues throughout the tree so
let's look at a landscape tree from the
top down we'll explore the crown the
branches the trunk and even the roots
and discover how we can keep our
landscape trees healthy and resistant to
summertime storms so let's start our
discussion of healthy trees with the top
of the tree and the tree crown as we
know in the summertime we get a lot of
storms with high velocity winds so what
can we do to help reduce those forces
well the first thing that we can do is
some preventative pruning and that's
good not only for the tree but for us as
well why is he good for the tree well
because if we do some thinning in the
canopy we'll reduce the resistance with
which the wind moves through the canopy
and therefore will reduce the forces
that could potentially break off
branches that reach the base of the
branches in the trunk it's good for us
because preventative pruning will help
take care of problems like this we'll be
removing dead wood that could otherwise
fall from the tree and damage your
landscape or worse cause injury to us so
good preventative pruning will help the
tree and make the landscape a safer
place to be so we know that summertime
storms can bring high wind velocities
and those winds can apply an awful lot
of force to the base of these branches
some of these branches
are strong enough to endure those forces
and some of them are weak and are going
to break how do we know which are strong
which are weak how do we know which
branches we should prune away in which
we can keep safely on the tree well
there are subtle signs and clues on each
of these branches and here's a couple of
very good examples
this branch attachment with the smaller
branch coming in is relatively strong
and we know that because the base of the
branch attachment is kind of a wide
u-shape and the branch itself is
relatively small compared to the trunk
what this tells us is there's
overlapping wood fibres between the
branch and the trunk and that makes for
a strong attachment that's a branch we
can keep on the other hand we have a
relatively large branch here and you can
see that it's attached to the trunk with
a relatively narrow v-shaped angle what
that tells us is there's a layer of bark
that extends from the base of the branch
deep into the trunk so instead of having
overlapping wood fibres we have a
separation between the wood fibres in
that layer of bark that makes this
branch attachment relatively weak and we
should decide whether we can prune that
branch off or whether we can do
something to make that branch attachment
stronger one of the options that we
might consider is a series of cables in
the upper portion of the tree crown
those cables combined with a series of
rigid braces at the base of the branch
attachment can make that branch
attachment much stronger and much safer
so we have two options preventative
pruning or strengthening the branch
attachment with cables and braces so
it's important to keep the upper portion
of the tree the crown the branches
healthy and strong to endure those
summertime storms but let's not forget
the root system of the tree that's
particularly important there's a couple
of things that we can do to help protect
the root system of this tree and as you
can see we have a wide mulching around
the
the tree that's very important because
that removes the need to have lawn
mowing equipment get close to the base
of the tree that protects the roots that
protects the root collar but as you can
see this particular tree has some
surface roots that extend beyond the
edge of our mulch ring physically
protecting the root system is a very
good idea and we can do that by the wide
application of a mulch ring at the base
of the tree and also thoughtfully
adjusting the depth of the blade of the
lawn mowing equipment so that we're not
doing unnecessary damage to these
surface roots there's one more thing
that we can consider and that's
providing the nutrients to the root
system so that they can remain vigorous
and we do that through the application
of a slow-release fertilizer that
encourages root growth
having a healthy structurally sound root
system this is the most important aspect
to keeping this tree healthy strong and
resistant to summertime storms now
there's one more thing that we haven't
talked about and that's how do we
protect this tree from lightning storms
we have a tree where we've installed a
lightning protection system just down
the street let's go take a look now
we've talked about the excessive forces
that come with summertime storms in the
form of high winds but there's one more
force that we have to consider and
that's the electrical discharge that
comes along with lightning strikes what
can we do to protect significant
landscape trees from the damage
associated with lightning well the
answer is to install a lightning
protection system which is a network of
copper cables that are attached
throughout the crown of the tree when
lightning strikes this tree instead of
the electricity coming down the trunk of
the tree it will race along the series
of cables and be directed into the
ground preserving this tree from damage
in this case we've even installed a fuse
system so that the arborist can come
back inspect this tree and know for sure
when a tree has been hit by lightning so
that we can do additional checking of
the system
now we've built an entire video on
lightning protection systems and you can
find that at wwe.com forward slash
lightning and learn more about lightning
protection systems well that's it for
this edition of talking trees I hope
you've enjoyed another segment of our
fact or fiction series join us again
next time I'm RJ Luverne for the Davy
tree expert company
you